# Neural Network for the Detection of Destroyed or Damaged Villages in Darfur, Sudan

In this project, coordinating with the Human Rights Data Science Lab at Michigan State Unviersity, I train a neural network capable of detecting if a village in Darfur, Sudan has been damaged or destroyed via free and publically accessible LANDSAT7 30m resolution remote sensing data.

## Motivation

Organizations investigating human rights abuses are often strapped for both cash and researchers. Traditional investigations often rely on a small team of experts poring over hundreds of square miles of remote sensing data looking for signs of building destruction or burning. Developing an algorithm to automatically scan over an area and identify potential zones of destruction will likely save time and energy and allow organizations to collect a more comprehensive body of evidence.

Furthermore, investigations oriented around individual building level analysis often require high resolution imagery, usually less than 5 meters and often 1 meter. Such data is almost always proprietary and tremendously expensive, locking out smaller organizations from important investigative tools. For example, at the Human Rights Lab, we have great difficulty in finding quality and high definition satellite imagery. Google Earth does have some high definiton available, but it is often too out of date to be useful for ongoing human rights abuse, especially in remote areas. LANDSAT and Sentinel data, on the other hand, is free, easily obtainable, and updated regularly with global coverage. But because these data often have bigger resolutions (30m for LANDSAT and 10m for Sentinel) individual buildings are too small to be detected and so a spectroscopic approach is needed. Such an approach is far more accessible for smaller and volunteer organizations.

## Methodology

In a past investigation in the Human Rights Lab, we collected a vast dataset of villages in Darfur, which includes their coordinates and their status (No damage, damaged, or destroyed). Because this dataset contains sensitive information on vulnerable populations, it is not available in the public repository. The spectroscopic data for each village was extracted via Google Earth Engine. Specifically, I extracted the bands B1(blue), B2(green), B3(red), B4(near infrared), and B5 and B7 (both shortwave infrared). I also computed NBR (Normalized Burn Ratio) and NDVI (Normalized Difference Vegetation Index). As for labelling of the data, I combined damged and destroyed into the same 'damaged' category because the distinction is less important that that of whether violence occured or not. Using this data, I then trained a neural network binary classifier with tensorflow. To make the classifier as effective as possible, the class distribution was rebalanced to 50-50.

## Results

The classifier achieved an accuracy of 0.71, suggesting that the model is working reasonably well although still below human standards. Recall is at a reasonably good 0.78, though that does imply a false negative rate of 0.22. This is concerning because it suggests that 22% of actually damaged villages were not correctly identified by the model, which is frustrating identifing all the damaged villages is important to a comprehensive analysis of human rights abuse in Darfur. Loss was 0.55 and AUC was 0.71, both metrics that suggest the model is decent at distinguishing between damaged and not damaged villages. Finally, creating graphs for each of the bands for both damaged and non damaged villages show that both classes have similar spectographic signatures for all bands except NBR (not surprising since militants often burn villages to the ground.) This suggests that spectrographic averages can only take us so far when building a classifier and that an image detection model might be more effective. However, given that high resolution satellite imagery is not easily accessible, building such a classifier will certainly prove to be a challenge.